Slide on special nature of spatial data

What do I mean by a spatial component to the data? Why are spatial data different?Spatial is special1. The observation is tied to a physical place – an address, a zip code, a set of coordinates 2.	Mappable! Spatial data can be mapped! This is often the appeal, whether or not you’re going to do any kind of data analysis. Just that visual representation of a map can be enough to get people running to open data sites everywhere. Again, of course, a map is not always the best or smartest way to represent data or to represent the outcome of an analysis. 3.	you need to deal with spatial reference systems for your data, and this can be totally daunting for a new person. But it’s important. If you screw this up, not only are you screwing up the representation of your data, you’re screwing up any underlying calculations (distance, density, etc)4. Tobler’s First Law of Geography – “near things are more related than distant things”. This is a complete oversimplification, but it’s a useful aphorism for keeping in mind how you should deal with spatial data in a more complicated analysis analysis, especially if you’re thinking about some kind of regression – ie. What is the relationship among crime, vacant land, and poverty in Philadelphia – you want acknowledge from the start that your observations are not in fact independent. That these on the ground relationship depend on each other. Slide on broad categories of spatial analysisSpatial is special, and special forms of analysis are required for handling spatial data and making sense of relationships between these data set. There are lots of different methods for making sense of spatial data, and these methods can roughly fall into a few broad categories. 1. Large data sets → smaller data sets. This is something that everyone who works with data deals with, not just spatial data. However, the ways you summarize, aggregate, represent the data are probably going to be different. 2. Exploratory spatial data analysis – this describes any number of techniques for exploring data, modeling outputs, and linking tabular statistics to a map. An example of this might be looking at outliers on a scatterplot and seeing where those outliers are on a map. 3.spatial statistics – point pattern analysis, identifying hot spots, trend surface analysis, spatial autocorrelation techniques (how alike are near things), ordinary least squares regression4.mathematical and predictive modelsSlide on specific techniques•	point pattern analysis (kernels, nearest neighbor and K statistics, identifying hot spots)•	spatial interpolation -- kriging•	spatial regression (OLS regression assumptions, autocorrelation measures, spatial regression models)The technique depends on both the data you’re using, and the specific research question you’re asking. Slide giving overview of PySal
What is PySAL?Terrific spatial analysis library*Exploratory spatial data analysis*map classification
Developed by Luc Anselin and team, now at GeoDa center at ASU
Several nice GUI wrappers
Plug-ins for population GIS packages